feat: Improvements to HOL blocking article (#40184)
mdn/content: files/en-us/glossary/tcp_slow_start/index.md

sidebar: glossarysidebar
---

> {{glossary('TCP')}} slow start is an algorithm that detects the available network bandwidth for packet transfer and balances transmission speed according to the network's capabilities.

Reviewer: Propose discover rather than detect - it's a process.

```suggestion
{{glossary('TCP')}} slow start is an algorithm that helps discover the available network bandwidth for packet transfer and balance transmission speed according to the network's capabilities.
```

> The slow start mechanism prevents congestion when a network's capabilities are initially unknown, and slowly increases the volume of information sent until the network's maximum capacity is found.

Reviewer: While it's called slow start, it actually isn't slow. Also, this is where I like my sentence on where this is useful - it is not just on when they are initially unknown - if you get congestion then what knew is no longer valid.

```suggestion
The mechanism rapidly increases the volume of information sent from a very low level to a threshold level. If congestion is detected the threshold is reset to a much reduced level and the slow start process starts again.
This prevents congestion when a network's capabilities are unknown: at the beginning of a connection, after a period of inactivity, or after detecting congestion — without itself causing congestion.
```

sidebar: glossarysidebar
---

{{glossary('TCP')}} slow start is an algorithm that detects the available network bandwidth for packet transmission and balances transmission speed according to the network's capabilities.
The slow start mechanism prevents congestion when a network's capabilities are initially unknown, and slowly increases the volume of information sent and received until the network's maximum capacity is found.

To implement TCP slow start, the congestion window (_cwnd_) sets an upper limit on the amount of data a source can transmit over the network before receiving an acknowledgment (ACK). The slow start threshold (_ssthresh_) determines the (de)activation of slow start. When a new connection is made, cwnd is initialized to one TCP data or acknowledgment packet, and waits for an ACK. When that ACK is received, the congestion window is incremented until the _cwnd_ is greater than _ssthresh_. Slow start also terminates when congestion is experienced.

> ## Congestion control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Congestion avoidance
```

> Congestion itself is a state that happens within a network layer when the message traffic is too busy it slows the network response time. The server sends data in TCP packets, the user's client then confirms delivery by returning ACKs. The connection has a limited capacity depending on hardware and network conditions. If the server sends too many packets too quickly, they will be dropped (meaning, there will be no acknowledgement). The server registers this as missing ACKs. Congestion control algorithms use this flow of sent packets and ACKs to determine a send rate.

Author: Maybe this is better? We're just short of a new glossary on "congestion avoidance"

```suggestion
Network congestion is what happens when the amount of data sent exceeds the network's capacity (the maximum amount of information that can be transferred at any time).
This can occur when a node on the network is sent more data than it can process, there's a sudden burst of data across the network, a deliberate flooding of information from participants, among other reasons.
When a network is congested, machines on that network experience degraded quality of service, like slow data transfers and dropped packets. 
The slow start algorithm is one major part of TCP congestion control, which helps prevent networks from becoming overwhelmed by traffic from senders.
```

{{GlossarySidebar}}

{{glossary('TCP')}} slow start is an algorithm that detects the available network bandwidth for packet transmission and balances transmission speed according to the network's capabilities.

> The slow start mechanism prevents congestion when a network's capabilities are initially unknown, and slowly increases the volume of information diffused until the network's maximum capacity is found.

Reviewer: Is diffused the right word?

> To implement TCP slow start, the congestion window (_cwnd_) sets an upper limit on the amount of data a source can transmit over the network before receiving an acknowledgment (ACK). The slow start threshold (_ssthresh_) determines the (de)activation of slow start. When a new connection is made, cwnd is initialized to one TCP data or acknowledgment packet, and waits for an ACK. When that ACK is received, the congestion window is incremented until the _cwnd_ is greater than _ssthresh_. Slow start also terminates when congestion is experienced.

Reviewer: Do we need this level of detail?

I'm not sure about the algorithm. I think what happens is cwnd tells us how long before we expect a response. If we send data for more than cwnd without a response that indicates congestion. So what we're doing is increasing the amount we either reach or desired rate as set by the ssthresh, or we don't get a response, indicating congestion. 

If so, is this right?

```suggestion
To implement TCP slow start, the congestion window (_cwnd_) sets an upper limit on the amount of data that a source can transmit over the network before receiving an acknowledgment (ACK): if a response is not received in this window then the network is considered to be congested.
The slow start threshold (_ssthresh_) determines when slow start is activated and deactivated.
When a new connection is made, cwnd is initialized to one TCP data or acknowledgment packet, and waits for an ACK. When that ACK is received, the congestion window is incremented and the next packet is sent. The process continues until either the _cwnd_ is greater than _ssthresh_ or a packet is sent without a response in the congestion window, after which slow start is terminated.
```

If not, then we need to rewrite anyway, because it doesnt make sense.

Author: I found these useful:

* https://www.researchgate.net/figure/TCP-Slow-Start-and-Congestion-Avoidance-phase_fig1_332436793
* https://www.noction.com/blog/tcp-transmission-control-protocol-congestion-control

So during slow start:
* `cwnd` grows exponentially for each ACK
* When we hit `ssthresh`, congestion avoidance begins and `cwnd` grows linearly instead
* If there's packet loss (timeout or duplicates), `ssthresh` set to `cwnd`/2 and `cwnd` is reset
* slow start begins again

I think we can say something like this for the:

```suggestion
During TCP slow start, the congestion window (_cwnd_) sets an upper limit on the amount of data that a source can send over the network before receiving an acknowledgment (ACK).
If a response is not received in this window then the network is considered to be congested.
The slow start threshold (_ssthresh_) determines when slow start is activated and deactivated.
When a new connection is made, the cwnd is initialized, and when an ACK is received, the congestion window is increased and the next packet is sent.
The process continues until either the _cwnd_ is greater than _ssthresh_ or a packet is sent without a response in the congestion window, after which slow start is terminated and congestion avoidance begins.
```

Apparently cubic is the default on a lot of systems since quite a while:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CUBIC_TCP

Reviewer: The problem is that the last sentence might be true, but it isn't helpful without all that information you provided above. Reading it as it is written you'd jump forward to the section on collision avoidance and assume that this text was wrong - because the following sections says that slow start is one of the tools you can use for congestion avoidance.

I think the problem is ... the whole thing. Let's structure like this https://www.researchgate.net/figure/TCP-Slow-Start-and-Congestion-Avoidance-phase_fig1_332436793

I'll take a shot. If you hate it you can revert the commit.

Reviewer: Do you think we might do something like this for the whole thing (i.e. replacing all the current text)

----

**TCP slow start** is the first phase of many common {{glossary('TCP')}} congestion control algorithms.
It is designed to rapidly determine a network's capacity at the beginning of a connection, after a period of inactivity, or after detecting congestion, without itself causing congestion.

When using the algorithm, data rates are set using a congestion window (_cwnd_).
This window defines the upper limit on how much data can be sent in which acknowledgment (ACK) packets are still being reliably received.
If responses are not received with the current cwnd, then the network is considered to be congested.

In the slow start phase the cwnd is initially set to a low value and increased exponentially until a configured slow start threshold (_ssthresh_) is reached.
In the second phase, "congestion avoidance", the cwnd is ramped up linearly until congestion is detected.
If at any point congestion is detected, _ssthresh_ is set to half the level at which congestion was detected and the slow start phase is restarted.

Author: I like this direction, so yes, I think you're right to go with your first impression to remove the specifics cwnd etc. I like the intro sentences we have, though, so we could cut even more details to summarize with a variation of this:

>{{glossary('TCP')}} slow start is an algorithm that detects the available network bandwidth for packet transfer and balances transmission speed according to the network's capabilities.
The slow start mechanism prevents congestion when a network's capabilities are initially unknown, and slowly increases the volume of information sent until the network's maximum capacity is found.
>
>Network congestion occurs when more data is sent than the network is able to transfer between nodes at any given time.
When a network is congested, machines on the network experience degraded quality of service, including slow data transfers and dropped packets.
The slow start algorithm is a major part of TCP congestion control, as it ensures that new connections progressively increase data rates and that those rates don't overwhelm other nodes.

Some points to keep, IMO:

* "prevents congestion when a network's capabilities are initially unknown"
* "slowly increases the volume of information sent until the network's maximum capacity is found"
* congestion effects are "degraded quality of service, including slow data transfers and dropped packets"
* "slow start algorithm is a major part of TCP congestion control,"

Reviewer: @bsmth I think this makes sense, or at least is a better baseline for future discussion. I have merged this in verbatim and if I have further comments I'll add them.

Reviewer: Phew. Thanks for your patience.

## Congestion control

> Congestion itself is a state that happens within a network layer when the message traffic is too busy it slows the network response time. The server sends data in TCP packets, the user's client then confirms delivery by returning ACKs. The connection has a limited capacity depending on hardware and network conditions. If the server sends too many packets too quickly, they will be dropped (meaning, there will be no acknowledgement). The server registers this as missing ACKs. Congestion control algorithms use this flow of sent packets and ACKs to determine a send rate.

Reviewer: Rewrite. In particular the first sentence.
